Hello everyone and welcome to part three.
Array's arrays are going to allow us to store various basic data types in a sequence so we can then
later access them as needed.
And this is all best explained through example code.
So let's get started.
I'm going to hop right to my browser and open up the console.
All right so here we have the console open and we want to know why even bother using arrays.
Well imagine we have three variables that our countries sign this var country one and it's equal to
the string USA then I have our country too.
We'll have it be equal to Germany and then we have our country three and let's have it equal to China.
Now if we wanted to we could keep doing this.
But instead of having to declare a variable for every single string it will be a lot easier if I just
had one sort of data structure that could take in the strings themselves and name that whole thing a
single variable name and who can do that is through the use of brackets which create arrays.
So I will instead create a variable called countries and set it equal to an array of those strings.
So now I have USA Germany and China and now this saves me a lot of variable assignments.
And you could also format of this across multiple lines so you can do something like var countries is
equal to USA comma.
And if you hit enter here you can keep typing Germany comma China.
So that's sometimes another way that you'll see array's being constructed one line per item but usually
it's the first way.
It really depends on how many items are in the array.
So just keep that in mind either of these ways is fine but that's kind of the whole point of entrain.
Save yourself the effort of having to define multiple variables.
Now let's talk about accessing elements of the array.
Each element in this array is in a fixed sequence position meaning the elements are in order and can
be called by their position.
So they're get placed in order and they stay in order and indexing just like a string starts at zero.
So I will clear the con..
We still have countries defined here wups.
Let's try that again.
Countries define USA Germany and China.
And if I say countries and then you square bracket indexing I can actually grab items from that array.
So let's say I want to grab China.
Well if indexing starts at zero that's going to be 0 1 2 and that grabs me China there.
All right well let's clear this and continue on.
So again just like indexing characters from a string you can also do reassignments you can reassign
elements by accessing their index and then just re-assigning it.
So if I want to change China to another other country we can grab countries too.
That was where China was and said equal to France enter.
And now when I call countries I see USA Germany and France now you couldn't do this sort of re-assignment
of a string.
And that's the difference between something that's immutable and something that's mutable.
OK so let's visit a little more on this topic of immutability and mutability.
And that is just to spell it out for you.
That's mutable versus mutable coming from the word to mutate or to change.
So let's clear our consul and show you an example.
You remember that I right now have countries as USA Germany and France and I could do the re-assignment
as I did earlier by saying countries whatever index I wanted to change and then some other country.
So we can make this something like Spain and now when I visit countries again I say USA Germany Spain.
So that means an array is mutable.
I can index and re-assign and it's a sequence.
However not every sequence is mutable so strings are immutable.
If I try to do the same action it won't actually work.
So remember country 1 is USA.
If I try to say country one grab two that's going to be equal to a.
So country one grab two is a let's try to change it from USA to us b the same way we did with countries.
So I will say country one to and I will set it equal to B if I enter here it just outputs B.
But if I actually look at country one to see if anything changed it did it.
And that's because a string is immutable in this situation.
So they're both sequences we can index the pretty much the exact same way but the array is mutable and
the strings are not.
OK let's continue on by talking about mixed data types.
So a javascript array can actually take mixed data types.
We showed earlier in array called countries that only had strings in it.
But I can make a variable called mixed and it can take in anything it can take in a boolean a number
and a string.
And notice here that the syntax highlighting shows these are all three very different data types and
mixed has no problem holding them in.
So an array can take in mixed data types and it will also report back a length.
So here we can see we have three items calling length in an array just reports back how many elements
are in the array.
Now let's begin to discuss array methods so we're going to discuss just some basic methods available
to you when you're working for ways in Javascript.
And there's actually a link in the documentation to the developer that Mozilla the org page and I'm
going to go to it now just to show you real quick have it opened here in a new tab array Javascript.
And this says basically everything you'd ever want to know about an array.
How to create an array access stuff loop over an array and then to the array center removed from the
front of an array.
If you scroll all the way down it has tons and tons of information about arrays.
A lot of stuff that we're never going to really need or use for our use cases in the course.
But if you dive deeper into javascript and you end up really enjoying that language you may want to
check out a lot of the stuff here.
So again a great resource and the link is in the notes or you can just google search Mozilla developer
network javascript array and it will take you this page going back to the actual con..
Let's start with the most basic and useful Array methods.
So I will clear my console and say variable Mirei is equal to 1 to.
Now let's talk about adding and removing elements.
So to add or remove elements from an array use the push and pop methods.
Let's start with removing the last item.
So to remove the last item and return it as a new variable use the dot pop method.
So if I want a variable called last item to be the last item in my arm Ira I will set it equal to my
are dots
close parentheses here to actually execute the pop method.
And now when I checked last item I see number three.
And if I check my R I see that I've successfully popped off and removed the last item from my array.
If we instead want to add an item to the end of the array we use the push command.
Let's show you how to use that very similar feature except you say my A-R or whatever the name of your
is.
You type push inside of these princes sees you type whatever item you want to push to the end of the
array.
So let's make a string called new item analysis CECCO My array.
Now we see we have 1 2 and new item.
And when you push the item it reports back the length of the array after you push it.
So now we have three items in the race so reported back three.
And if you want you can also expand this.
So the console has a nice little feature here where it says ok.
Index 0 you have one and that's when you have to index to your new item length is three and has more
information here that we'll discuss in a future lecture OK.
Let's say you want to index the last item in the array.
Well that's also really easy.
You say my are brackets and then it's going to be my are the length minus one.
And this will return the last item.
Remember in this indexing starts at zero which is why we're doing that minus one and we can actually
nest arrays as well.
So I can make a variable called Matrix and said equal to a nested array so arrays within arrays.
So something that looks like this.
Four five six
and then seven eight nine so now if I look at my matrix I can see I have an array inside of an array
where it gets reported back how many items are in that array but keep in mind if I check the length
of my matrix it only has three items in it.
Each of those items however has an additional 3 items so keep that in mind when you're checking and
working with nested arrays.
Now let's talk about array iteration and that is using things like for loops with an array.
OK so let's discuss array iteration imagine that I have an array we'll call it V or we'll call it a
r r for array and it's going to have just three strings in it is going to have the letter A the letter
B the letters C and that's it.
Just three items in the array.
And if we check it out there we have it a B and C.
Imagine I want to print out a b and c how could I do that.
Well I could use a normal for loop.
So my for loop would look something like this.
It would say variables start.
I start to equal to zero and from I or while I'd lessen the length of the array keep incrementing 1
to i and then we will say Konsole the log the elements of that array using indexing
and the heres how we can print a b and c..
Now that's the for loop way of iterating through an array.
But there's also the four of statement so we can say we take a look at it.
We're going to clear this so we can get a better look.
For and then imprint sees some sort of temporary variable name letter of the array.
In our case it's called a r r do something.
So in our case I will say cancel the log the letter.
And here we get the exact same result.
So this is the form of loop that we briefly mentioned during the four loops lecture in the course so
I can say for some temporary variable name of an array and then we can do something with that temporary
variable and we can call it temporary variable whatever it was.
So I can say something like for jelly of the array console log.
Jeli a b and c and we can also do something that's completely unrelated to any elements of the array.
So instead of saying cancel that log jelly I could just say cancel that log.
Hello.
And that's kind of just right.
Hello three times.
So hello.
Hello hello.
And you could see the chrome estated.
It was written three times.
So that is the art of using the for loop.
Now a really common thing that happens when you're dealing with an array is you want to pass each item
of that array into a function.
Let me show you what I mean.
Going to clear my console imagine I want to alert the user to every letter in that array.
So I will say four letter
A R R
alerts letter and then close those curly brackets hit enter and I get an alert that says a b and c that
sort of thing is so common to use some sort of function for every element in an array that there's actually
a shorthand for this.
And it's the for each method.
What you do is you take the name of your day and then off of it you call a for each and then you pass
in the function you want to use.
In our case it's the alert function.
And note that I just passed in the function itself.
I do not call a function like this.
So there's no close and open print sees around the end of the function.
It's just the function itself.
Now if I hit enter this does the exact same thing a b and c..
So again calling a function for every element in an array is such a common occurrence that javascript
already has it built in as a method for arrays.
The dot for each method word that you don't just pasand the function itself into the for each method.
Let me show you one more example with our own custom defined array or a function I should say I'm going
to create a function and it will say.
Awesome name or a function it takes in a name and then it will cancel that log.
The name plus the phrase is awesome.
Curly brackets the end that.
So what does an awesome do.
Well if I call add awesome the word Django it says Django is awesome.
So now I will create an array called topic's
has Python in it.
Django in it and I will say science in it as well.
Three awesome things and I'm going say topic's for each and then pasan my function which in my case
was just an awesome.
I hit enter and then I see Python is awesome.
Django is awesome and science is awesome.
All right.
That's really the basics of array.
Remember you have the for each method.
You have the four of method as well for Array iteration.
You also have the pop and push methods to take things out of an array and add them to an array.
You can nest arrays arrays can take in mix types and you can do reassignments for Array and you just
index arrays with the Brechin rotations starting at index 0.
Do you have any questions feel free to post the Kewney forums.
But coming up next is an exercise to get practice on all of these topics.
I'll see you at the next lecture.